Initial contributors guide lines around features (#48928)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/features.md

# Developing Features for Keycloak

Keycloak Features allow individual capabilities of Keycloak to have different support levels; additionally features
can be disabled when they are not needed.

In most cases all significant new capabilities added to Keycloak should be wrapped by a new experimental feature. The
feature is then graduated to preview when it is considered feature complete, and eventually graduates to supported
after feedback from the community.

When implementing a new feature in Keycloak it is highly recommended to define requirements and a minimum viable feature
initially, with incremental value added to the feature in later stages. Keeping the scope of the feature small allows
implementing the feature quicker and increases the quality as better test coverage and security can be provided.

## Feature level expectations

> ### Experimental

Reviewer: The way I read this we're changing the scope of Experimental Features, at least the way I understood them so far. It now seems that we'll be promoting Experimental much more. So far, I understood it as the lowest support level for something that's still in development, WIP. Since the new wording requires docs and good test coverage[^1] (which is expected for something meant to be tried out by the users), should we introduce a new Feature level for WIP stuff, i.e. features that are being developed across multiple releases and are not meant to be used even as experimental so far, and lack docs and/or good test coverage?

[^1]: I understand that in the ideal world tests are included with every iterative increment to given feature, but in reality in rapid development they are often reviewed and extended as a follow-up.

Author: Experimental features are by definition WIP, so would make no sense to introduce another level. In this doc when it says documentation is required, it obviously means whatever scope/capabilities of the feature that is currently available is documented. That means at any point in time whether or not someone is using an actual release or a nightly release they have updated documentation that reflects what is or what is not available in the experimental feature.

Reviewer: This slightly shifts the current paradigm around experimental features – docs, tests ready at any point in time. But that's ok and enforces more agile development.

* Is not recommended for production use-cases, only for evaluation purposes
* Does not have to be feature complete
* Good test coverage is required

> * Documentation is required, and should be updated as the feature evolves

Reviewer 2: I'd say this is a high bar to Experimental, but it is essential to get feedback. How would people otherwise be ably to try it out? So +1 from me.

> * Does not have to provide backwards compatibility for APIs, nor migrating support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Does not have to provide backwards compatibility for APIs, nor migrating support. Experimental features should be **never** enabled in the production environment as they can break later migration of the production instance.
```
Is it possible to add some more "strong" warning about never enable experimental features in production? Would be good to avoid the bugs similar to this (saw some reports like this in the past):
- User enables experimental feature in his production instance in version X
- User creates new realm. That will for example add some new experimental authenticator to the "browser" flow
- Experimental feature is removed in version X+1. User migrates to this version. Now he tries to authenticate to his realm, but will be unable to do that due the issue like "Authenticator not available" as experimental authenticator impl does not exists anymore

Author: Updated to `Is not supported`

> ### Preview

Reviewer: AFAIK, we're also potentially open to making breaking changes to Preview features if necessary. Is that correct? If so, we should state it here.

Author: See preview features section:
`Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs, and migration. However, this can be omitted if needed`

Reviewer: I'd suggest to be more explicit here. I'll open a suggestion bellow.

* Is supported for production use-cases, but does not guarantee seamless upgrades
* Must be feature complete (minimum viable feature)
* A review of test coverage is required prior to graduating a feature to preview
* A security review is required prior to graduating a feature to preview
* Review of any feedback or open issues must be resolved prior to graduating a feature to preview
* Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs, and migration. However, this can be omitted if needed

> * When a feature is graduated to preview it is expected the feature will graduate to supported in the next major or minor release

Reviewer 4: There's currently 7 preview features in `main` and some of them have remained Preview for years. Is there anything we can do to better keep on top of this?

For example, a possible solution/aid could be mandating that when graduating a Feature to Preview status a GitHub issue must be created to track it's eventual graduation to full supported. We can then associate this issue with an upcoming milestone so it's not forgotten.

Author: The main parts to solve this are covered in the preview section, specifically:

* `Is supported for production use-cases, but does not guarantee seamless upgrades`
* `When a feature is graduated to preview it is expected the feature will graduate to supported in the next major or minor release`
* `Must be feature complete (minimum viable feature)`

Preview features in the past where more like experimental features, and we did not have a clear plan to graduate the features. Often they needed a significant amount of work to be ready to be supported.

It's out of scope of this document to capture how the planning/issues are done, but the way we should do that is have one umbrella issue for a new feature, with milestones for experimental, preview, supported. Essentially the "feature" is not closed until it is graduated to fully supported.

Reviewer 4: > It's out of scope of this document to capture how the planning/issues are done, but the way we should do that is have one umbrella issue for a new feature, with milestones for experimental, preview, supported. Essentially the "feature" is not closed until it is graduated to fully supported.

:+1: I like this approach of providing a single point of reference for a feature. It should make things more clear for users tracking developments. For example, if we decided to remove a Preview feature before graduating it to fully supported, the user can easily see the context of why that decision was made etc, instead of just a note in the upgrading guides that the feature has been removed.

> * When a feature is graduated to supported it is expected the feature will graduate to supported in the next major or minor release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When a feature is graduated to preview it is expected the feature will graduate to supported in the next major or minor release
```

### Supported

* Is supported for production use-cases

> * Must provide backwards compatible APIs and migration support if needed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Must provide backwards compatible APIs and migration support for minor releases
```

Author: Incorrect, see breaking changes to supported features. New feature versions should be created, not just going ahead and breaking the contract in the existing version.

Reviewer 2: Then maybe state this explicitly - I don't think we've done this in the past for preview features.

Author: State what? I'm not clear what is missing:

The preview section says:
`Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs, and migration. However, this can be omitted if needed`

The supported section says:
`Must provide backwards compatible APIs and migration support if needed`

Then there's more details in the `Breaking changes to supported features`.

* Review of any feedback or open issues must be resolved prior to graduating a feature to supported

# Breaking changes to supported features

Breaking changes to supported features must be introduced through a new version of the feature. During a major release
life-cycle the default version can not be changed. However, there may be multiple supported versions. Previous versions

> may be deprecated, but should remain the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may be deprecated, but should remain the default and fully supported.
```

Author: Is it not implied already that deprecated features are fully supported?

Reviewer: Ok, let's keep as is. "Deprecated + default" kinda suggests "supported".

> New major releases can remove features completely or older feature versions. In general this should only be done after

Reviewer 4: I think we should highlight this more by adding a dedicated heading, e.g `# Removing Features`.

Does the same policy apply for Experimental, Preview and fully supported features or is it possible to remove an experimental feature across minors?

Author: Updated this section, please check it again

Reviewer 4: LGTM :+1:

> the feature or feature version having been deprecated for a minimum of one major or minor release of Keycloak.

Reviewer: Maybe we could be more explicit here?
```suggestion
the feature or feature version have been deprecated for a minimum of one full major release of Keycloak, or at least one minor release preceding the major release.
```

Author: What you are proposing is not the correct intent. Minimum deprecation time is one release (effectively 3 months). Updated to reflect that

Reviewer: Thanks, the new wording looks good to me.

# Documentation

## Experimental

> Relevant documentation and guides for the feature should be clearly marked as experimental, and as under active 

Reviewer 4: In the guides we can define a `docs/guides/teampltes/experimental-feature.adoc` file that then include in the relevant guides/sub-sections detailing an Experimental feature.

See this PR as an example: https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/pull/49006

> WARNING: This feature is *experimental* and may introduce breaking changes in future versions of {project_name}. Do not use this feature in production environments.

Author: For sure, but this doc should not capture all the details on the how things are done, rather focus on the requirements

Reviewer 4: FYI for others who are writing docs for Experimental features, that template is now in `main`.

> Relevant documentation and guides for the feature should be clearly marked as experimental, and as under active 

Reviewer 2: To add here: Documentation for experimental features is not included in downstream. IMHO preview features should be allowed to have docs in downstream.

Author: I presume by downstream you mean RHBK? If so that is not relevant to these guidelines as this is for upstream only

development. This should include a link to the nightly release for those that want to evaluate the latest changes to 
the feature.

To encourage feedback there should be a link to a single GitHub Discussion (in the [Feedback category](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/categories/feedback)). The Discussion may optionally further link to GitHub Issues
relevant to the feature.

## Preview

Relevant documentation and guides for the feature should be clearly marked as preview, with a notice that the feature

> can be used in migration, but seamless upgrades are not guaranteed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be used in production, but seamless upgrades are not guaranteed.
```

The link to the GitHub Discussion should remain for preview features.

## Supported

> As a feature is graduated to supported any experimental/preview notices should be removed, including link to GitHub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a feature is graduated to supported, any experimental/preview notices should be removed, including the link to the GitHub
```

# Developing Features for Keycloak

Keycloak Features allow individual capabilities of Keycloak to have different support levels; additionally features
can be disabled when they are not needed.

In most cases all significant new capabilities added to Keycloak should be wrapped by a new experimental feature. The
feature is then graduated to preview when it is considered feature complete, and eventually graduates to supported
after feedback from the community.

> When implementing a new feature in Keycloak it is highly recommended to define requirements and a minimum viable feature

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When implementing a new feature in Keycloak, it is highly recommended to define requirements and a minimum viable feature
```

initially, with incremental value added to the feature in later stages. Keeping the scope of the feature small allows
implementing the feature quicker and increases the quality as better test coverage and security can be provided.

## Feature level expectations

### Experimental

* Is not supported for production use-cases, only for evaluation purposes
* Does not have to be feature complete
* Good test coverage is required
* Documentation is required, and should be updated as the feature evolves
* Does not have to provide backwards compatibility for APIs, nor migrating support

### Preview

* Is supported for production use-cases, but does not guarantee seamless upgrades
* Must be feature complete (minimum viable feature)
* A review of test coverage is required prior to graduating a feature to preview
* A security review is required prior to graduating a feature to preview
* Review of any feedback or open issues must be resolved prior to graduating a feature to preview

> * Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs, and migration. However, this can be omitted if needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs, and migration. However, this can be omitted if needed, i.e. a breaking change can be introduced to a preview feature
```

Author: You are basically just writing again what is in the first sentence

Reviewer: Do you mean:
> but does not guarantee seamless upgrades

That does not read to me the same as "breaking changes can happen".

Author: I meant `Should aim to provide backwards compatible APIs`
